layout: post
title: SmartOS
description: Taking SmartOS for a first spin
date: 2014-12-26
author: Jonas Colmsjo
tags: ['post','SmartOS']


Introduction

SmartOS is a version of Sun's Solaris/SunOS with support for the excellent
`dtrace` tool. `dtrace` is starting to find its way into the Linux world
and there is also support for OSX (which I'm running). But it would be nice
to be able to use `dtrace` in production which means that I need to look at
SmartOS for now. Joyent, which is behind SmartOS, has a cloud running on
SmartOS to it is easy to get started with a production server. But I'd
also like to develop and test on a similar setup. So here I am giving
SmartOS a first spin.


Quick reference

Some commands:

 * List zones (containers): `vmadm list`
 * Show data links: `dladm show-link`
 * Show physical networks: `dladm show-phys`
 * Show NICs: `dladm show-vnic`
 * Show IP addresses: `ipadm show-addr`
 * Show network configuration of zone: `vmadm get 2d688169-9bd1-4677-bb67-99b8740d70e0|json nics`


This gist automates the install (after SmartOS has been installed):
`curl -k https://gist.githubusercontent.com/colmsjo/a0d5307e8b61ca905ce7/raw/60e80e70aced8bb12a1a544b40036c210b015efc/install.sh | bash`


Installation

I'll setup SmartOS on VirtualBox in OSX. This is easy, just follow these
instructions on the [SmartOS wiki](https://wiki.smartos.org/display/DOC/SmartOS+as+a+Sandboxed+VirtualBox+Guest)

Check what IP adress the machine received and login with `ssh`. This is much
simpler than using the terminal in VirtualBox. I use bridged network to make this
easy.

The network within zones were not reachable with this approach. Testing this instead:

 * Boot from the ISO as a LiveCD
 * use "bridge mode"
 * in the advanced settings, enable "promiscuous mode".


SmartOS first steps

I havent worked with zones, zfs etc. on Solaris so I needed to check otu the common
commands:

Zones are created using images. This lists the availble images: `imgadm avail`

These are the basic images to build custom images from: `imgadm avail|grep base64`

Import the latest (at hthe time of writing) basic image: `imgadm import 62f148f8-6e84-11e4-82c5-efca60348b9f`

Put this into zone01.json:

    {
      "brand": "joyent",
      "image_uuid": "62f148f8-6e84-11e4-82c5-efca60348b9f",
      "alias": "zone01",
      "hostname": "zone01",
      "max_physical_memory": 512,
      "quota": 10,
      "resolvers": ["8.8.8.8", "208.67.220.220"],
      "nics": [
      {
        "nic_tag": "admin",
        "ip": "192.168.1.131",
        "netmask": "255.255.255.0",
        "gateway": "192.168.1.1"
      }
      ]
    }


Create the zone:

    vmadm create -f zone01.json
    Successfully created VM 2d688169-9bd1-4677-bb67-99b8740d70e0


Login:

    zlogin 2d688169-9bd1-4677-bb67-99b8740d70e0
    # set password to make it possible to login with vmadm
    passwd root

    vmadm console 2d688169-9bd1-4677-bb67-99b8740d70e0


Now in the new zone, install some software:

    [root@zone01 ~]# pkgin ls
    reading local summary...
    processing local summary...
    updating database: 100%



Setup global zone

Make it possible to install packages in the global zone:

    cd /
    curl -k http://pkgsrc.joyent.com/packages/SmartOS/bootstrap/bootstrap-2013Q1-x86_64.tar.gz | gzcat | tar -xf -
    pkg_admin rebuild
    pkgin -y up


Install whatever you need: `pkgin -y install nano ...`



Networking

Networking with NIC, data links etc. connected to zones is a bit of a mystreri
(at least for me). A found an introduction to [data links](http://docs.oracle.com/cd/E23824_01/html/821-1458/geyrb.html) that is good
to check out.

 * Show links: `dladm show-link`
 * This shows the physical interfaces (NIC) when executed in the global zone:
`dladm show-phys`
 * There is also virtual NICs: `dladm show-vnic`
 * Show bridges: `dladm show-bridge`

Create a NIC (not sure howto make this works):

    dladm create-vnic -l e1000g0 zone0
    ifconfig zone0 plumb
    ifconfig zone0 dhcp
    # dhcp timed out, tested thus instead (use inet of server+1)
    ifconfig zone0 inet 192.168.1.135 netmask 255.255.255.0 up


Testing some more:

    dladm show-phys
    dladm show-link
    ipadm show-addr
    dladm create-vnic -l link vnic
    ipadm create-ip vnic
    ipadm create-addr -T static -a address addrobj
    ipadm create-addr -T dhcp  e1000g0/zone0


Troubleshooting:

 * This seams promissing - [VirtualBox and Zones](https://forums.virtualbox.org/viewtopic.php?f=20&t=52428)
 * [VirtualBox and Solaris networking](http://www.virtualbox.org/manual/ch09.html#vboxbowsolaris11)
 * Check routes: `routeadm`
 * Restart route service : ``


Setup a firewall for zones using NAT

Followed this article [NAT using Etherstubs](http://wiki.smartos.org/display/DOC/NAT+using+Etherstubs)


    cat > /etc/ipf/ipnat.conf <<EOL
    map net0 10.0.0.2/32 -> 0/32
    EOL

    routeadm -u -e ipv4-forwarding
    svcadm enable ipfilter
    ipnat -l



Services

SmartOS is built around services using Service Management Framework (SMF).
Some intro can be [found here](http://wiki.joyent.com/wiki/display/jpc2/Using+the+Service+Management+Facility)



Resources

 * [Cheat Sheet](http://wiki.joyent.com/wiki/display/jpc2/The+Joyent+Linux-to-SmartOS+Cheat+Sheet)
 * [Create a zone](https://wiki.smartos.org/display/DOC/How+to+create+a+zone+%28+OS+virtualized+machine+%29+in+SmartOS)
 * [The bible](http://wiki.smartos.org/display/DOC/The+OpenSolaris+Bible)
